Brady Lund: Hello, everyone. So this week we are going to be talking about informatics, informatics being the study of how people interact with information and data technologies.
Brady Lund: So what is informatics? It's the study of how we apply information and data technologies to solve problems across various domains.
Brady Lund: So you may have heard of terms like health informatics.
Brady Lund: biomedical informatics, these kinds of things, these are specific areas or specific fields within informatics that study the application of information and data technologies within these particular domains, so biomedical domains, health domains, so on and so forth.
Brady Lund: So
Brady Lund: our understanding of informatics that's obviously going to require both us to have knowledge and skill in the natural sciences, meaning areas like mathematics, computer science, you know, basic understanding at least of how technology works, so that we can design and build tools that are useful.
Brady Lund: but also the social sciences. We need to know how people work. We need to understand things like information behavior, so that we can describe how people are going to interact with these tools. We need to understand both sides. How are people going to interact with these technologies? How do we design these technologies? So that ultimately we can design technologies that people will use?
Brady Lund: So we're going to be answering questions like.
Brady Lund: well, how do people interact with new technologies.
Brady Lund: An example very recently, generative, artificial intelligence, large language models, chatbots like Chat Gpt. How are people interacting with these? So we can theorize all we want while these tools are being developed about how people might use them.
Brady Lund: But what do we actually observe when Chatgpt becomes available? How are students using them. How are medical professionals using them? How are the average public members using them?
Brady Lund: We answer questions like, will artificial intelligence be embraced by the public. So.
Brady Lund: as I've mentioned several times this semester, we may have a really great product. We may have something that we think is very cool, but it doesn't have a ton of practical value if people aren't going to use it. So we need to
Brady Lund: see how people are going to use these tools actually.
Brady Lund: and then within realms like health informatics, we'll answer questions like, how can we improve health outcomes for patients based on health data?
Brady Lund: So we're working with information and data technologies. So we can harness the power of data to inform treatments and those kinds of things. And again, that involves us understanding people and how our treatments impact them as well as understanding data and technology, and how those can be used to support that end goal.
Brady Lund: So brief history on informatics, our field of informatics here.
Brady Lund: it really emerged in the 19 fifties and sixties. Of course, we had many kinds of technologies before then. Information technologies, the telephone, the telegraph
Brady Lund: radio. But computing technologies were really the start of bringing about more questions about how these innovations are really going to integrate throughout society and cause a major impact on how we work, how we learn how we interact and and how these technologies can be harnessed to really benefit us. In particular.
Brady Lund: in the seventies and eighties. This is where we see a transition from just designing computing technologies to developing specific systems that work in particular contexts.
Brady Lund: to help people to serve specific roles. So we have business accounting systems. We have health record systems. We have library management systems. These are specific systems. Obviously, you're not going to use them. In another context. An accounting system is not going to be helpful for storing library books. A library system is not going to be helpful for storing health records.
Brady Lund: They're very specific systems to serve specific purposes, and this allows for us to branch out and have
Brady Lund: specific fields of informatics like health informatics, business informatics, so on.
Brady Lund: But this really blossomed significantly in the 19 nineties, because at this time we started to see personal computers. So now computers were not just being used by specific entities, but every member of the public has computers. And now we all have computers in our pockets and the Internet. So
Brady Lund: information and data become widely available both to us and about us. As data is constantly being collected about us as we interact with different apps and scroll the Internet, those kinds of things.
Brady Lund: So
Brady Lund: innovations like mobile phones. And now artificial intelligence, have really expanded our study of how people interact with technology.
Brady Lund: So let's look at a few major types of informatics that you may be interested in. I know in this class we have students from a variety of different fields, some from information science. If that's the case, you could potentially study any of these areas that you're interested in, particularly social informatics. But we also have students from a wide variety of disciplines. And so some of these may be relevant to you more so than others.
Brady Lund: One type of informatics is health informatics. In this particular case, you're using technology and data
Brady Lund: to improve healthcare to improve delivery of healthcare outcomes. So this can include using technology to assist people creating new assistive technologies, creating a better hearing aid, those kinds of things
Brady Lund: up to using data to help people so based off data about people and about what we know about the public? Can we make more accurate diagnoses? Can we create better treatment plans for the public? That's all. A component of health informatics.
Brady Lund: bioinformatics is using biological data
Brady Lund: to advance research in genomics and medicine. This is is also sometimes called biomedical informatics. And so using biological data, genomic data, those kinds of things in order to
Brady Lund: advance what we know about medicine, about advance, what we know about the genome, those kinds of things
Brady Lund: social informatics is looking at society. So it's
Brady Lund: touching on several things that we've talked about this semester. It's my major area of research is social informatics. And that's looking at
Brady Lund: technology data, technology. Information. Technology is out there in society. Let's understand how people are interacting with it and how things like our understanding of ethics, our understandings of policy and the law impact how we're interacting with this technology.
Brady Lund: educational informatics.
Brady Lund: obviously probably better known by the terms of learning, technology or educational technology or instructional design and technology. But educational informatics is essentially using these information and data technologies within the specific context of teaching learning and educational administration. So if you're interested in
Brady Lund: the information data technologies, but specifically within the context of schools.
Brady Lund: then educational informatics or learning technology may be in the field for you.
Brady Lund: and then business informatics, again, obviously more commonly known by names, like information systems and so forth.
Brady Lund: But business informatics is essentially using information data technologies to improve business performance, whether that's integrating technologies to help certain roles within a business or using data technologies to create new insights to improve business performance.
Brady Lund: And lastly, let's look a little bit at the impact of informatics. So
Brady Lund: one major impact of informatics that's really enriched
Brady Lund: discipline like information sciences. It's a highly interdisciplinary field.
Brady Lund: That means it brings together people from a wide variety of specializations and disciplines together to work on solving problems. And so
Brady Lund: this has invited people from
Brady Lund: fields like computer science and sociology or psychology to come together to try to understand how people are interacting with technology brings people with a background in pedagogy or
Brady Lund: education instruction, together with people from systems so that they can understand how people, how learners will use systems, those kinds of things. So that brings together discussion from across different disciplines which can bring new ideas and forming in better ways how
Brady Lund: we understand the world around us.
Brady Lund: It also research in this area really supports developing
Brady Lund: ethical design of new technologies and designs that are user friendly. So if you're interested in user experience ux, this is part and parcel of that. That's a major focus of informatics is developing systems again, that people are going to want to use. That's that's the end goal of what we're doing here. And so understanding user experience, understanding ethics and policy, and how that applies to designing systems for people
Brady Lund: core to what we do.
Brady Lund: And, as I have said many times already in this class building. A good technology is great.
Brady Lund: you know, it might be the most fascinating technology in the world.
Brady Lund: but it doesn't necessarily have a ton of value if people don't want to use it. So our goal with informatics is to understand how people interact with data and technology so that we can create things that are actually useful to them that they're going to want to use, that they're going to want to spend money on. And so that is the goal of our area of informatics and what we study in this area.
Brady Lund: So that is informatics for this week, as always. Let me know if you have any questions, as you're navigating the activities for this week, and I'll see you again for our module next week.